ANIMATION OF HUMAN LOCOMOTION
The animation of human locomotion is a special problem in animation, and thereare several ways it can be approached.  Some of the approaches are kinematicspecification, keyframe interpolation, interpolation using a kinematic approach with finite stateautomatons, and interpolation using a dynamic approach, and a hybrid kinematic/dynamicapproach.

##Kinematic Specification

Kinematic specification is a fairly simple method with which to produce animationof human locomotion.  With this method, the positions of the joints and the joint anglesare recorded for an entire walking cycle and these data are given to a program whichrenders an animation.  The acquisition of the data can be done by filming or videotaping ahuman subject with the key joint positions highlighted, or by using a special device such asa goniometer which electronically measures the joint angles.  Special care must betaken when gathering the data, however, for perspective distortions and signal fluctuationscan corrupt the results.  The resulting data must be converted into a usable form, whichoften requires human assistance.  The animations produced using this method areextremely realistic, but this realism requires many hours of human effort.  In addition, each timea new movement is needed, an additional sequence must be filmed.

##Keyframe Interpolation

A simple way to produce animations with minimum input is to allow the user todefine keyframes and the computer interpolates between them, as shown in Figure 3-1.  Usuallya cubic or other high-order spline is used for the interpolation, and the results areacceptable.  However, the amount of realism depends on the number of keyframes defined,and thus the amount of human input necessary increases with the amount of realism desired. Also, a new set of keyframes must be defined for each new motion.

##Finite State Automaton Control

Zeltzer (1982) proposed an animation controller for locomotion which utilized afinite state automaton (FSA) model.  His model was based on the principle that at any pointin time, the human body has a state associated with it.  This state consists of the jointangles
and joint positions for all joints in the body.  Zeltzer included only the appropriatejoints for walking in his FSA model, which are the hip, knee, and ankle joints.  His FSA hadfour states,  with transitions based on the heel striking or toe leaving the ground, as inFigure 3-2.  The main FSA was divided into two subordinate FSAs, with one devoted tothe period when a foot is off the ground and the other devoted to the period when the footis in contact with the ground.  In addition, two more FSAs were constructed to representthe arm motions.  The intermediate arm and leg positions were found using a simplelinear interpolation scheme.  This setup was successfully used by Zeltzer at Ohio StateUniversity to animate the locomotion of human skeleton models.  Although this FSArepresentation could simulate different walking patterns as well as jumping, it was really justanother form of keyframe interpolation and shared its advantages and disadvantages.
A more elaborate approach to the animation of human locomotion is thedynamic approach.  With this method, a set of differential equations is formed which representthe dynamics of locomotion.  These equations are usually based on the Newton's laws,specifically the second law of motion, F=ma.  The computer accepts parameters controllingthe
animation from the animator and solves these equations to produce a realistic animation. This method can be applied to situations such as uneven terrain, in conjunction witha collision detection system.  However, this increases the computations involved.The animations produced using this method are generally very realistic, although if theparameters are not specified correctly the motion looks somewhat artificial.

##Hybrid Approaches

Bruderlin and Calvert (1990) proposed a system which integrated kinematicand dynamic approaches to animation.  This system utilizes a hierarchical motioncontrol process, in which high-level user commands are broken down into specificlow-level
programs which control the animation.   The low-level programs use a dynamicapproach based on the specific action to produce the frames of the animation (for example, acompound pendulum simulates a leg which is not in contact with the ground).  Thecontrol hierarchy is similar to that used by the brain to control motion, as Figure 3-3 shows. Thus, the animator is able to specify variations in locomotion by using only a fewparameters.  This is a simple system for the animator to use and has proven to be verysuccessful despite its computational requirements.

##The Ideal Controller

An ideal walking controller would combine the best features from the existingapproaches.  This ideal controller would have to 1) produce realistic animation fromhigh-level commands 2) operate very quickly 3) be computationally simple so that theprocessor could concentrate on other tasks (e.g. collision detection) if necessary, 4) performa variety of gaits, and  5) easily adapt to new gaits.  This thesis presents a methodwhich attempts to meet these criteria using Kohonen self-organizing networks.
The method of animation control proposed in this thesis is in effect a type ofexplicit control, in that specific instructions are provided to the computer to produce theanimation of a walking human figure.  However, the introduction of neural networks toeffect this control moves the burden of control from the programmer to the computer.
