# CHAPTER 7 - KOHONEN SELF-ORGANIZING NETWORKS

One neural network model which is based on biological neural networks is theself-organizing network, proposed by Teavo Kohonen of the Helsinki University of Technology.Although the model is based on biological systems, it is not completely faithful for the brain is organizedin a much more complicated manner than the Kohonen network, input patterns are not the samein biological systems, and the interconnection between neurons in biological systems is muchmore complex.  However, the basic idea of organizing inputs into a topological ordering issuccessfully achieved by the Kohonen network.
Kohonen's self-organizing network has two layers: an input layer and a competitive layer. Each element of the input layer is connected to every element of the competitive layer(see Figure 7-1).  


The competitive layer is usually a two-dimensional grid, either rectangularor hexagonal.  Each connection has an associated weight value, specified by
where
i is a unit in the competitive layer.

Each connection weight has a continuous value between 0 and 1.  Before the network istrained, the connection weights must be initialized.  This is typically done by setting each weight toa random value between 0.45-0.55.
The operation of a Kohonen network begins when an input patternE={e
and signifies the amount of agreement between the vectors E andU
The unit with the minimum Euclidean distance is known as the winning unit, and is denoted by c.
After the winning neuron is found, its neighborhood must be determined.  Theneighborhood, designated by N
